Once around globular
clusters. So globular clusters look like
this. This is a typical one. Messier
object number 54.
that Messier catalog of things that are
not
comets created by Charles Messier, the
great comet hunter who was being
pestered with people reporting fuzzy
blobs in the sky. And so he made a list
of things not to bother checking. And we
now use that as a catalog of interesting
objects. And quite a few of them are
these globular clusters, starting with
perhaps this one, Messier number 54.
It's a group of stars, 100,000 to half a
million stars all packed tightly
together. And they look absolutely
beautiful with a small
telescope. But there are two types of
star clusters that you
find, open clusters and globular
clusters. The open
clusters have lots of young hot blue
stars and are fairly loosely packed and
fairly weakly held together by gravity.
In fact, over time, the stars will
slingshot each other out of the cluster
and the cluster will dissipate and boil
away with the individual stars ending up
orbiting around the galaxy on their own.
Globular clusters on the other hand
consist of old stars mainly yellow and
red ones and they're very very tightly
packed together. The reason that the
stars are mostly the yellow, orange and
red colors is because they are old and
because all the really hot white and
blue ones have already burnt out and
died and no new ones have been made. So
open clusters, young, very recently
formed, contain lots of giant stars,
high mass stars that can be blue hot or
white hot but don't live very long.
Whereas the old globular clusters just
contain the very longived fainter low
mass
stars. Now we find them surrounding the
galaxy. We have about 150 globular
clusters around the outer parts of the
Milky Way galaxy itself. So there's a
diagram here of the 100,000 lightyear
diameter of the Milky Way with the bulge
in the center and the galactic disc and
then the globular clusters strung out
around it. And that positioning of the
globular clusters was a key part of what
was known as the great debate and the
attempts to argue as to whether or not
the Milky Way galaxy and its environment
was the entire universe or whether there
were other island universes beyond
things like the Andromeda galaxy or the
Andromeda nebula as it was known then.
And indeed its identity as a separate
galaxy of stars was very much the
subject of the
debate. But this little plot here is
Harlo Chappley's distribution map
showing the position of the sun in
yellow and the distribution of globular
clusters as all of the little green
blobs showing that they're very much off
to one side. And that is because of
course the galaxy is offset from the
center to the sun is about 25,000 lighty
years. So the galactic center is where
the red cross is and we are offset over
to the left there about halfway from the
center to the very edge of the galaxy
and it shows that the globular clusters
are very much distributed around the
center of the galaxy.
Now when we are talking about these old
stars, we're talking about ones that
formed early in the life of the universe
and we identify these as population two
stars. They are mostly composed of
hydrogen and helium. They don't really
have very many of the heavy elements at
all. Those are formed in stars and
thrown out into the
cosmos to reform again in later
generations of stars by explosions,
supernovi and planetary nebula, puffing
off their elements that they've made out
into the uh interstellar regions. And so
really the universe is getting dirtier
and dirtier. But when we look at these
very old stars in the globular clusters,
they were formed at a time when the
universe hadn't really had a chance to
produce very many of these heavy
elements and forge them into new stars.
So they are population two almost pure
hydrogen and
[Music]
helium. Now another way to look at the
stars is to plot what's called the
Herzbrung Russell diagram.
In this we plot the absolute magnitude
the power output of the star up the y
ais and we plot the color or the
temperature which tells us um the color
from the cool red stars orange yellow
and then all the way up to the blue
stars for the hottest ones. Um and this
chart's got some green ones on and it
really shouldn't have because there
aren't any green stars. That's the
subject of another one of my lectures.
Those ones should really be showing up
in white.
But the point is that the color tells us
the temperature. And we get this line
across the center of the normal main
sequence stars, the ones that are
forging hydrogen into helium in their
cores. We have other groups of stars,
the giant stars, the super giant stars
and the white dwarfs shown here, which
are the result of different processes.
So the giants and super giants are where
the evolution of the star has gone
beyond the core hydrogen consuming
fusion process through to fusing other
elements either in shells around the
core or directly in the core themselves.
And then the white dwarfs, those are
dead stars. There are stars that have
come to the end of their life mostly
from smaller stars and have collapsed
down puffing off their outer layers in
the
process. And when we look at this
diagram for all the stars in the Milky
Way, we see stars in all these groups.
We see young hot blue vigorous stars at
the top left, long lived, slow red
dwarfs down at the bottom right, sunlike
stars in the yellow region. In the
middle, we see red giants, orange
giants, yellow giants, we see super
giants, and we see black uh white dwarfs
as
well. But when we look at the same chart
drawn for a globular cluster, it looks
rather different. What we usually find
is something like this where the main
sequence has some stars in it in the G
and F classes, the yellow ones and
correctly drawn the white ones
here
where we have a sudden turnoff. The
stars then seem to boil off up right and
over towards the giant branch region.
And what's going on here is that as time
has gone on, the stars have run out of
fuel in their cores. They depleted the
hydrogen and left an inert helium core
and as a result turned onto the giant
branch. And the most massive ones have
done this
first.
Following them, you get the slightly
less massive ones. And you gradually
work down the mass scale with each
progressive group of stars turning off
as they reach the end of their lives.
And of course, the the massive stars
live fast and die young. They burn
hotter and at a prodigious rate. So
they're the ones that run out of fuel
first. And what this is showing is that
the time since the stars were formed
corresponds to the age of the stars at
the turnoff point
and the turnoff point will gradually
work its way down the chart. So if we
came back in a billion years from now,
the uh same globular cluster would have
yet more of the stars turned off up to
the right and the main sequence line
would be even
shorter. So essentially this turnoff
point shows the age of the cluster. We
can know the age limit for stars of a
certain mass being on the main sequence
and where that corresponds to the
turnoff point. that tells us the age of
the cluster because all the stars in the
cluster were born together. So they're
all the same age. Um and so this is very
much a sort of u way of identifying how
old these globular clusters are. Whereas
the Milky Way has a much wider selection
of different ages of stars. There have
been many generations of star formation
that have gone on to making it up. So
what we find is that as time goes
forward as we say we start with a
complete population on the main sequence
when things are very young and then as
time goes on the ones at the top left
the massive hot fast burning stars do
their turn off to become giants and then
on the right that gradually uh that it's
like a fuse burning down the uh stars
progressively
depart off to become giants from the tip
of the main sequence as it gets older
and
older. Now, what that leaves us with is
a few odd balls. We have the blue
stragglers. You can see just a few blue
stars in the B category over on the left
hand side of the
diagram. Now, these should have burnt
out by now. There shouldn't really be
any blue stars that were formed with all
the others at the beginning of the
cluster and still around now. And
there's a real puzzle as to what's going
on here. One suggestion is that these
are actually rejuvenated stars as a
result of mergers. So where you have had
a binary star system with
perhaps a couple of stars, one of them
has aged and swollen up into a giant and
then dumped material from its outer
layers over onto its nearby
companion, giving that companion a dose
of extra hydrogen
fuel increased mass and suddenly caused
it to burn much faster. So, it's not
been burning hot and blue for all its
life, but it's just received a new
injection of fuel. Um, and sometimes
this can result from the merger of stars
where they have collided with each other
completely and two small stars have gone
to make one massive one that's now
burning much more vigorously. So, we
think those are possibilities for where
the blue stragglers come from.
But returning to the globular clusters,
we can see that there are often two
types visible. We have the ordinary
globular clusters and what's known as
core collapse clusters. And you have an
example of each on the screen here. The
core collapse one is the one at the top
and the more open one is the one at the
bottom right where you can see a more
gradual progression of the stars all
packing together towards the center
whereas in the core collapse one at the
top there is a very dense region in the
middle indeed. And uh what we think has
happened here is that as the cluster has
aged, the dynamics of it are such that
the interactions between the stars
can have as a result of close
approaches. You swap momentum between
the stars. They swap kinetic energy.
Some of the stars get thrown outwards
boiling them out to the outer regions of
the globular cluster and the others are
slowed losing momentum and fall in
towards the center causing this core
collapse phenomenon. So you end up with
a an aged and dense core and many more
stars thrown towards the
outside. And that seems reasonable. But
it also means that in the center the
density is very high. And we think that
as a result of stellar merges and
collisions, you also get the formation
of a black hole. pack enough material
together in a small enough space then
you will by Einstein's equations
get a region of space so curved that
life can't escape from it a black hole
and we think that these core collapse
globular clusters have intermediate mass
black holes in the center perhaps 100 to
100,000 solar masses buried in the
middle there um and that brings us on to
another subject. These origins of these
black holes can very much be divided
into three classes. We have the ordinary
stellar mass black holes. If you can
describe a black hole as ordinary that
result from supernova
explosions where a giant star reaches
the end of its life and the core
collapses inwards. The outer layers are
blown apart and you end up with a black
hole of perhaps five to 10 times the
mass of our sun forming from a star that
might be 50 100 times the original mass
of the sun before it explodes. So a
fraction of it perhaps 10% ends up in
the core as a black hole a stellar mass
black hole. And then we have at the
center of galaxies where you can have
super massive black holes as a result of
an enormous amount of material getting
together. And we have one 4 million
solar masses in the center of the Milky
Way. And these can range from millions
up to billions of solar masses. I think
the record holder is getting on for a
100red billion solar masses that we know
of anywhere in the universe.
And I'm going to talk once around ton
618 which talks about one of the most
massive super massive black holes in the
known universe. But the globular
clusters seem to contain these
intermediate
mass black holes and there's something
very very interesting about that which
we will come back
to. But let's have a look at a few
clusters. Well, this is perhaps my
favorite. I live in the northern
hemisphere and this is the best globular
cluster visible from these parts. It's
very very impressive. It was one of the
first deep sky objects that I saw with a
telescope, a 12-in reflector telescope
just outside Portsmouth about 50 years
ago. And I still remember seeing it
today. And it's like a whole collection
of diamonds scattered on a velvet
background. That would be my very poetic
description of it. Half a million stars,
145 light years in diameter,
22,200 light years away from us. And the
target of the Araibo radio message. The
radio message was beamed out there back
in
1974 containing a digitized image of DNA
and hydrogen molecules for scale and of
people and radio dishes and the third
rock from the sun. Um, and set out in an
easy to decode manner. But it's going to
take another 22,
uh,150 years before the message arrives
at M13. Um, and then they've got to
decode it, if there's anyone there at
all. Um, and we'd have to wait another
22,000 years for a reply.
But there's probably nobody there anyway
because these are population two stars
without very much in the way of uh
heavier elements. No iron for the blood,
no oxygen to breathe, not much carbon to
go about making interesting organic
chemistry. So there might be half a
million target stars and there's very
unlikely to have intelligent life living
on longived uh carbon-based planets um
or iron cores for making those planets
or any of that. Anyway, this is M13.
It's absolutely beautiful. An object
that I have never seen. 47 Tucan is an
even
larger black hole based
uh globular
cluster. This one is a little bit nearer
13,000 lighty years, but it contains
millions of stars. And studies of it
have shown 21 blue stragglers in the
core. So some of those mergers going on
in there, not surprisingly. X-ray
sources, cataclysmic variables,
millisecond pulsars, all sorts of
interesting things in 47 Tani. And
again, a compact core pointing at that
black hole, probably 1,500 solar masses
for the intermediate mass black hole in
the middle. And surveying for transits
of exoplanets orbiting around these
million stars, we found none. again
confirming that these ancient globular
clusters may not have the building
blocks to make
planets. They should be able to make gas
giants though. So maybe we should be
finding planets. H
interesting. And then there's Omega
Centuri. Classed as a globular cluster.
This would be the biggest of all. 15,800
light years away. Visible from the
southern hemisphere. so bright you can
see it easily with the naked eye. You
can just about make out M13 on a really
clear night. But uh Omega Centuri much
brighter and a lot bigger. 10 million
stars, 4 million solar masses. So much
larger that it's bigger than all the
other globular clusters. And there's
reason to believe that it might have a
different
origin probably. And I think this is
extremely likely. This is in fact the
nucleus of a dwarf galaxy. It's probably
got an intermediate black hole in the
center and there's some evidence for
that as well. But at 10 million stars
and 4 million solar masses, this is
pretty chunky and points to its origin
as a dwarf galaxy.
Another interesting one is the
intergalactic wanderer NGC 2419 in the
constellation of lynx. This is much
further away, 300,000 light years,
further away than the dwarf galaxies of
the melenic clouds that orbit around the
Milky Way. And at one time it was
thought to be a proper intergalactic
wanderer free of the gravity of the
Milky Way. But it could now look like
it's actually just captured by the Milky
Way's gravity in an orbit that's going
to take it three billion years. That's a
long
orbit. We have found a globular cluster
that orbits the dwarf galaxy, the large
Magelenic cloud. So
NGC1854, 135,000 light years away, is in
orbit round the dwarf galaxy, the LMC.
So they can have globular clusters just
like we can and so can Andromeda. And we
have found around 400 such clusters. So
it looks like the Andromeda galaxy's got
even more globular clusters going around
it than the Milky Way. And that would
make sense because it's a slightly
bigger galaxy. If we've got 150
globulars, Andromeda's got 400. We have
about 400 billion stars. Andromeda has
about two and a half times that. Uh
about a trillion of them. So these seem
to be in rough proportion. That makes a
lot of sense.
We found globular clusters going around
M87, the giant elliptical galaxy in
Virgo. And this one has about
13,000 globular clusters going around
it. And it's likely that M87 grew up
cannibalistically by eating other
galaxies. Other spiral galaxies coming
too close to it would be gobbled up by
its gravity. and maybe its enormous pile
of globulars are the previous property
of those spiral galaxies that it has
devoured. So that seems quite likely as
well. Now when we look at our Milky Way,
one of the things that has been
discovered is a whole lot of stellar
streams. There are about a dozen of
these that we know of that are great
loops of stars that sweep around the
Milky
Way through it above and below the plane
at different angles. And these look like
they are
the shredded remains of the Milky Way
capturing and consuming dwarf galaxies
over its history. And it seems extremely
likely that the big g uh big galaxy has
grown by absorbing and gobbling up all
of these smaller galaxies. Um and that
is basically how galaxies come to be in
the first place. They grow by eating
smaller ones. And that makes sense of
the Herzbrang Russell diagram when the
fact that we have stars of so many
different ages. And the reason is that a
lot of them have come from other dwarf
galaxies and were formed at different
epochs. So we have a complete mixture.
Whereas the globular clusters themselves
are all of the same age and so we're all
formed together.
And one of the things that brings this
all together is the Sagittarius dwarf
galaxy discovered in 1994 by Irwin and
Gilmore. What they found was that there
is a galaxy, a dwarf galaxy in the
process of being eaten by the Milky Way.
And so what we detected was this stellar
stream looping around the galaxy. But
it's not just a continuous stream of
stars. There's actually structure to it.
And it has the nucleus of this
Sagittarius dwarf galaxy still in
existence. And right slap in the center
of that galactic nucleus of the dwarf is
a globular cluster, Messier 54, the one
that we started this talk with. And what
this is telling us is that that globular
cluster may well be
the original nucleus, the original core
of the dwarf galaxy. And this would
bring it all into some sense. There's
another picture on the left there of a
dwarf uh sorry a globular cluster Paloma
12 quite a small one that appears to
have been captured from the Sagittarius
dwarf. So even these dwarf galaxies
probably had them before they came too
close to the Milky Way and got
spaghettified. But one of the things
that we know about galaxies in
particular is that they all have
these super massive black holes in the
center. And there is an amazing
correlation between
the mass of the black hole and the mass
of the galaxy itself. And if you plot
the two against each other, you get
amazing straight line all the way from
the biggest galaxy with a trillion uh
solar masses and a billion solar mass
black hole. So 1 1,000th being the
ratio. And that ratio is maintained so
that a uh modestsized spiral galaxy
might have a billion solar masses and a
1 million solar mass black hole.
But the straight line continues and the
globular clusters where we have been
able to determine the mass of the
cluster and the mass of the black hole
the intermediate mass black hole in the
center. We are finding these sit on the
line as well. And it all points to the
fact that actually these globular
clusters really are the nuclei of dwarf
galaxies. And maybe those globular
clusters that we have orbiting around us
are those nuclei. They've lost their
outer layers because the gravity of the
Milky Way has stripped all the stars
away from their outer regions where they
were less tightly bound. And only the
tightly bound cores survive with their
intermediate mass black hole controlling
them in orbit around the outside of
their main galaxy. And eventually maybe
they will get swallowed up as a result
of some pertubation. But it seems
extremely likely that globular clusters
and dwarf galaxies are really very very
highly related if not one in the same
thing and that uh we've been staring at
this all this time and not really
realizing what we were looking at. And
so with that I will end this talk. Thank
you very much for listening and uh hope
you enjoyed this one. This was created
as a result of a number of people
commenting that they would love me to
talk about the uh Omega Centuri and the
uh globular clusters in general. So I
hope I've answered the questions on that
one. Thanks very much.